27th International Mathematical Olympiad
Warsaw, Poland
Day I
July 9, 1986

1. Let d be any positive integer not equal to 2, 5, or 13. Show that one can find
distinct a, b in the set {2, 5, 13, d} such that ab − 1 is not a perfect square.
2. A triangle A1 A2 A3 and a point P0 are given in the plane. We define As = As−3
for all s ≥ 4. We construct a set of points P1 , P2 , P3 , . . . , such that Pk+1 is
the image of Pk under a rotation with center Ak+1 through angle 120◦ clockwise
(for k = 0, 1, 2, . . . ). Prove that if P1986 = P0 , then the triangle A1 A2 A3 is
equilateral.
3. To each vertex of a regular pentagon an integer is assigned in such a way that
the sum of all five numbers is positive. If three consecutive vertices are assigned
the numbers x, y, z respectively and y < 0 then the following operation is
allowed: the numbers x, y, z are replaced by x + y, −y, z + y respectively. Such
an operation is performed repeatedly as long as at least one of the five numbers
is negative. Determine whether this procedure necessarily comes to and end
after a finite number of steps.

27th International Mathematical Olympiad
Warsaw, Poland
Day II
July 10, 1986

4. Let A, B be adjacent vertices of a regular n-gon (n ≥ 5) in the plane having
center at O. A triangle XY Z, which is congruent to and initially conincides
with OAB, moves in the plane in such a way that Y and Z each trace out the
whole boundary of the polygon, X remaining inside the polygon. Find the locus
of X.
5. Find all functions f , defined on the non-negative real numbers and taking nonnegative real values, such that:
(i) f (xf (y))f (y) = f (x + y) for all x, y ≥ 0,
(ii) f (2) = 0,
(iii) f (x) 6= 0 for 0 ≤ x < 2.
6. One is given a finite set of points in the plane, each point having integer coordinates. Is it always possible to color some of the points in the set red and the
remaining points white in such a way that for any straight line L parallel to
either one of the coordinate axes the difference (in absolute value) between the
numbers of white point and red points on L is not greater than 1?

