Language: English
Day: 1
Tuesday, July 23, 2013
Problem 1. Prove that for any pair of positive integers k and n, there exist k positive integers
m1 , m2 , . . . , mk (not necessarily different) such that


 

1
1
1
2k − 1
= 1+
1+
··· 1 +
.
1+
n
m1
m2
mk
Problem 2. A configuration of 4027 points in the plane is called Colombian if it consists of 2013 red
points and 2014 blue points, and no three of the points of the configuration are collinear. By drawing
some lines, the plane is divided into several regions. An arrangement of lines is good for a Colombian
configuration if the following two conditions are satisfied:
• no line passes through any point of the configuration;
• no region contains points of both colours.
Find the least value of k such that for any Colombian configuration of 4027 points, there is a good
arrangement of k lines.
Problem 3. Let the excircle of triangle ABC opposite the vertex A be tangent to the side BC at the
point A1 . Define the points B1 on CA and C1 on AB analogously, using the excircles opposite B and
C, respectively. Suppose that the circumcentre of triangle A1 B1 C1 lies on the circumcircle of triangle
ABC. Prove that triangle ABC is right-angled.
The excircle of triangle ABC opposite the vertex A is the circle that is tangent to the line segment
BC, to the ray AB beyond B, and to the ray AC beyond C. The excircles opposite B and C are similarly
defined.

Language: English

Time: 4 hours and 30 minutes
Each problem is worth 7 points

Language: English
Day: 2
Wednesday, July 24, 2013
Problem 4. Let ABC be an acute-angled triangle with orthocentre H, and let W be a point on the
side BC, lying strictly between B and C. The points M and N are the feet of the altitudes from B and
C, respectively. Denote by ω1 the circumcircle of BW N , and let X be the point on ω1 such that W X
is a diameter of ω1 . Analogously, denote by ω2 the circumcircle of CW M , and let Y be the point on ω2
such that W Y is a diameter of ω2 . Prove that X, Y and H are collinear.
Problem 5. Let Q>0 be the set of positive rational numbers. Let f : Q>0 → R be a function satisfying
the following three conditions:
(i) for all x, y ∈ Q>0 , we have f (x)f (y) ≥ f (xy);
(ii) for all x, y ∈ Q>0 , we have f (x + y) ≥ f (x) + f (y);
(iii) there exists a rational number a > 1 such that f (a) = a.
Prove that f (x) = x for all x ∈ Q>0 .
Problem 6. Let n ≥ 3 be an integer, and consider a circle with n + 1 equally spaced points marked
on it. Consider all labellings of these points with the numbers 0, 1, . . . , n such that each label is used
exactly once; two such labellings are considered to be the same if one can be obtained from the other
by a rotation of the circle. A labelling is called beautiful if, for any four labels a < b < c < d with
a + d = b + c, the chord joining the points labelled a and d does not intersect the chord joining the
points labelled b and c.
Let M be the number of beautiful labellings, and let N be the number of ordered pairs (x, y) of
positive integers such that x + y ≤ n and gcd(x, y) = 1. Prove that
M = N + 1.

Language: English

Time: 4 hours and 30 minutes
Each problem is worth 7 points

