Language: English
Day: 1

Tuesday, July 8, 2014

Let a0 < a1 < a2 < · · · be an innite sequence of positive integers. Prove that there
exists a unique integer n ≥ 1 such that

Problem 1.

an <

a0 + a1 + · · · + an
≤ an+1 .
n

Let n ≥ 2 be an integer. Consider an n × n chessboard consisting of n2 unit squares.
A conguration of n rooks on this board is peaceful if every row and every column contains exactly
one rook. Find the greatest positive integer k such that, for each peaceful conguration of n rooks,
there is a k × k square which does not contain a rook on any of its k 2 unit squares.
Problem 2.

Convex quadrilateral ABCD has ∠ABC = ∠CDA = 90◦ . Point H is the foot of the
perpendicular from A to BD. Points S and T lie on sides AB and AD, respectively, such that H
lies inside triangle SCT and

Problem 3.

∠CHS − ∠CSB = 90◦ ,

∠T HC − ∠DT C = 90◦ .

Prove that line BD is tangent to the circumcircle of triangle T SH .

Language: English

Time: 4 hours and 30 minutes
Each problem is worth 7 points

Language: English
Day: 2

Wednesday, July 9, 2014

Points P and Q lie on side BC of acute-angled triangle ABC so that ∠P AB = ∠BCA
and ∠CAQ = ∠ABC . Points M and N lie on lines AP and AQ, respectively, such that P is the
midpoint of AM , and Q is the midpoint of AN . Prove that lines BM and CN intersect on the
circumcircle of triangle ABC .
Problem 4.

For each positive integer n, the Bank of Cape Town issues coins of denomination n1 .
Given a nite collection of such coins (of not necessarily dierent denominations) with total value at
most 99 + 21 , prove that it is possible to split this collection into 100 or fewer groups, such that each
group has total value at most 1.
Problem 5.

A set of lines in the plane is in general position if no two are parallel and no three
pass through the same point. A set of lines in general position cuts the plane into regions, some of
which have nite area; we call these its nite regions. Prove that√for all suciently large n, in any
set of n lines in general position it is possible to colour at least n of the lines blue in such a way
that none of its nite regions has a completely blue boundary.
Problem 6.

Note: Results with
constant c.

Language: English

√
√
n replaced by c n will be awarded points depending on the value of the

Time: 4 hours and 30 minutes
Each problem is worth 7 points

