English (eng), day 1

Monday, 11. July 2022
Problem 1. The Bank of Oslo issues two types of coin: aluminium (denoted A) and bronze
(denoted B). Marianne has n aluminium coins and n bronze coins, arranged in a row in some
arbitrary initial order. A chain is any subsequence of consecutive coins of the same type. Given a
fixed positive integer k 6 2n, Marianne repeatedly performs the following operation: she identifies
the longest chain containing the k th coin from the left, and moves all coins in that chain to the left end
of the row. For example, if n = 4 and k = 4, the process starting from the ordering AABBBABA
would be
AABBBABA → BBBAAABA → AAABBBBA → BBBBAAAA → BBBBAAAA → · · · .
Find all pairs (n, k) with 1 6 k 6 2n such that for every initial ordering, at some moment during
the process, the leftmost n coins will all be of the same type.
Problem 2. Let R+ denote the set of positive real numbers. Find all functions f : R+ → R+ such
that for each x ∈ R+ , there is exactly one y ∈ R+ satisfying
xf (y) + yf (x) 6 2.
Problem 3. Let k be a positive integer and let S be a finite set of odd prime numbers. Prove that
there is at most one way (up to rotation and reflection) to place the elements of S around a circle
such that the product of any two neighbours is of the form x2 + x + k for some positive integer x.

Language: English

Time: 4 hours and 30 minutes.
Each problem is worth 7 points.

English (eng), day 2

Tuesday, 12. July 2022
Problem 4. Let ABCDE be a convex pentagon such that BC = DE. Assume that there is a
point T inside ABCDE with T B = T D, T C = T E and ∠ABT = ∠T EA. Let line AB intersect
lines CD and CT at points P and Q, respectively. Assume that the points P , B, A, Q occur on their
line in that order. Let line AE intersect lines CD and DT at points R and S, respectively. Assume
that the points R, E, A, S occur on their line in that order. Prove that the points P , S, Q, R lie on
a circle.
Problem 5.

Find all triples (a, b, p) of positive integers with p prime and
ap = b! + p.

Problem 6. Let n be a positive integer. A Nordic square is an n×n board containing all the integers
from 1 to n2 so that each cell contains exactly one number. Two different cells are considered adjacent
if they share a common side. Every cell that is adjacent only to cells containing larger numbers is
called a valley. An uphill path is a sequence of one or more cells such that:
(i) the first cell in the sequence is a valley,
(ii) each subsequent cell in the sequence is adjacent to the previous cell, and
(iii) the numbers written in the cells in the sequence are in increasing order.
Find, as a function of n, the smallest possible total number of uphill paths in a Nordic square.

Language: English

Time: 4 hours and 30 minutes.
Each problem is worth 7 points.

