Language:

English
Day:

Monday, July 18, 2011
Problem 1. Given any set A = {a1 , a2 , a3 , a4 } of four distinct positive integers, we denote the sum
a1 + a2 + a3 + a4 by sA . Let nA denote the number of pairs (i, j) with 1 ≤ i < j ≤ 4 for which ai + aj
divides sA . Find all sets A of four distinct positive integers which achieve the largest possible value
of nA .
Problem 2. Let S be a finite set of at least two points in the plane. Assume that no three points
of S are collinear. A windmill is a process that starts with a line ` going through a single point
P ∈ S. The line rotates clockwise about the pivot P until the first time that the line meets some
other point belonging to S. This point, Q, takes over as the new pivot, and the line now rotates
clockwise about Q, until it next meets a point of S. This process continues indefinitely.
Show that we can choose a point P in S and a line ` going through P such that the resulting windmill
uses each point of S as a pivot infinitely many times.
Problem 3. Let f : R → R be a real-valued function defined on the set of real numbers that
satisfies
f (x + y) ≤ yf (x) + f (f (x))
for all real numbers x and y. Prove that f (x) = 0 for all x ≤ 0.

Language: English

Time: 4 hours and 30 minutes
Each problem is worth 7 points

1

Language:

English
Day:

Tuesday, July 19, 2011

Let n > 0 be an integer. We are given a balance and n weights of weight 20 ,
2 , . . . , 2 . We are to place each of the n weights on the balance, one after another, in such a
way that the right pan is never heavier than the left pan. At each step we choose one of the weights
that has not yet been placed on the balance, and place it on either the left pan or the right pan,
until all of the weights have been placed.
Determine the number of ways in which this can be done.
Problem 4.

1

n−1

Let f be a function from the set of integers to the set of positive integers. Suppose
that, for any two integers m and n, the dierence f (m) − f (n) is divisible by f (m − n). Prove that,
for all integers m and n with f (m) ≤ f (n), the number f (n) is divisible by f (m).

Problem 5.

Let ABC be an acute triangle with circumcircle Γ. Let ` be a tangent line to Γ, and
let `a , `b and `c be the lines obtained by reecting ` in the lines BC , CA and AB , respectively. Show
that the circumcircle of the triangle determined by the lines `a , `b and `c is tangent to the circle Γ.
Problem 6.

Language: English

Time: 4 hours and 30 minutes
Each problem is worth 7 points

2

