English (eng), day 1

Monday, 21. September 2020
Problem 1. Consider the convex quadrilateral ABCD. The point P is in the interior of ABCD.
The following ratio equalities hold:
∠P AD : ∠P BA : ∠DP A = 1 : 2 : 3 = ∠CBP : ∠BAP : ∠BP C.
Prove that the following three lines meet in a point: the internal bisectors of angles ∠ADP and
∠P CB and the perpendicular bisector of segment AB.
Problem 2.
Prove that

The real numbers a, b, c, d are such that a ≥ b ≥ c ≥ d > 0 and a + b + c + d = 1.
(a + 2b + 3c + 4d) aa bb cc dd < 1.

Problem 3. There are 4n pebbles of weights 1, 2, 3, . . . , 4n. Each pebble is coloured in one of n
colours and there are four pebbles of each colour. Show that we can arrange the pebbles into two
piles so that the following two conditions are both satisfied:
• The total weights of both piles are the same.
• Each pile contains two pebbles of each colour.

Language: English

Time: 4 hours and 30 minutes.
Each problem is worth 7 points.

English (eng), day 2

Tuesday, 22. September 2020
Problem 4. There is an integer n > 1. There are n2 stations on a slope of a mountain, all at
different altitudes. Each of two cable car companies, A and B, operates k cable cars; each cable
car provides a transfer from one of the stations to a higher one (with no intermediate stops). The
k cable cars of A have k different starting points and k different finishing points, and a cable car
which starts higher also finishes higher. The same conditions hold for B. We say that two stations
are linked by a company if one can start from the lower station and reach the higher one by using
one or more cars of that company (no other movements between stations are allowed).
Determine the smallest positive integer k for which one can guarantee that there are two stations
that are linked by both companies.
Problem 5. A deck of n > 1 cards is given. A positive integer is written on each card. The deck
has the property that the arithmetic mean of the numbers on each pair of cards is also the geometric
mean of the numbers on some collection of one or more cards.
For which n does it follow that the numbers on the cards are all equal?
Problem 6. Prove that there exists a positive constant c such that the following statement is true:
Consider an integer n > 1, and a set S of n points in the plane such that the distance between
any two different points in S is at least 1. It follows that there is a line ℓ separating S such that the
distance from any point of S to ℓ is at least cn−1/3 .
(A line ℓ separates a set of points S if some segment joining two points in S crosses ℓ.)
Note. Weaker results with cn−1/3 replaced by cn−α may be awarded points depending on the value
of the constant α > 1/3.

Language: English

Time: 4 hours and 30 minutes.
Each problem is worth 7 points.

